The Joe Rogan experience.
This was the beginning of this book because I was doing that.
I was looking at all the ingredients that go into Coca-Cola and saying, okay,
where what's in the drink. First of all, cuz it's from my hometown.
That's where it started. I said, okay,
I wanna find out all these natural resources in the product and you know,
is Coca in the drink. <affirmative> and also caffeine we'll get to that.
That's how it connect to Mon. But, um, Coca was the most interesting actually,
cuz I thought, you know, it's called Coca-Cola so does it have cocaine in it?
Um, and so I went back to look at that and turns out yeah. You know,
trace amounts back still in the beginning. No, no, no. In the beginning. Yeah.
But this is, what's interesting of about the history of, of the drink.
So this is 1886 back then the Coca leaf was actually seen as
something that was medicinal medicinal in innocuous, you know? Absolutely.
And everyone was using the Coca leaf. I mean there was a drink called VIN Maria.
It was actually a wine, a, a red wine that was mixed with Coca Leafs. Wow.
So it kind of had a little kick to it and like queen Victoria of England drank
this stuff Uly as grant, our president was like, woo. You know, COA wine.
This is awesome. And uh, and even the Pope actually, and I,
I wonder if communion would've had, you know, been Mariani,
we would all be cap or something, but, um, but so it was really popular.
And this guy, this guy who was down on his luck, John Pemberton,
who started Coca-Cola in Atlanta, he wanted to make a Coca drink himself.
And so he made this originally co was actually a wine.
It was like a wine of Coca. It was a red wine mixed with Coca leaves,
exact knockoff of that drink that was really popular. And um,
and then prohibition hit it's Atlanta because we're in the Protestant south in
the 1880s. And so he has to take out the alcohol.
And so he creates this non-alcoholic drink Coca-Cola that has the
Coco leaf in it. They weren't concerned about the Coca.
They were concerned about alcohol. Uh, and it, it remained in the drink, uh,
throughout the 20th century. What kind of would it have in it very small,
you know, and this, I think is important. You know,
people equate the Coca leaf with, you know, cocaine because yes,
you can make cocaine like street cocaine from, you know,
processing all these Coca Leafs.
But if you go to Peru today or you go to certain parts of south America,
people chew cocoa leave, it's, it's a normal practice.
It's been going back thousands of years to the Inca even. Um,
and so it's, it's very small amounts we're not talking about,
like in fact you'd probably get a bigger hit from like a, you know,
experience from a cup of espresso from Starbucks. Mm. Um,
but interestingly, the reason that cocaine became taboo white,
it got pulled from the drink,
had nothing to do with national laws in the country,
which was so interesting when I was studying it.
It had everything to do with racism actually in the south,
because there was a concern that cocaine was contributing to black crime in
Atlanta,
which was being of course blown up by segregationist and white supremacist and
ASA caner, who was white guy in Atlanta.
Didn't wanna have anything to do with that.
So he decides kind of quietly to take out the cocaine.
But here's the interesting, interesting thing, Joe,
they kept the Cocal leaf as one of their secreting ingredients. Yeah.
It it's so secret ingredient, number five, by the way, cook,
doesn't like talking about this.
This is not part of their history that they like discussing. Um,
but it's clear as day in the archives. You can see it.
So it's called merchandise number five,
the fifth secret ingredient in Coca-Cola and I like the name,
isn't it a nice number five. Well,
the whole idea is that you name things so that no one asks questions, right. Um,
what's merchandise number five.
Also that that ingredient includes a little bit of the Cola, um,
which is from, uh, west Africa actually.
And it was originally in there cuz it has caffeine,
another kind of caffeine kick, um,
that's where Coca-Cola come from <affirmative> but Cola by the way is with a K
the actual Cola. Anyway, that's merchandise number five.
And it's basically the flavor of the co leaf. Um,
the essence of the Coca leaf and the way it works is these leaves are brought in
from Peru is actually where CocaCola sourced it. And that was crazy.
I had to track down, okay, where are they getting their Coca Leafs from?
And there's this company called Maywood chemical company today,
the company's called Steppen chemical company. Is that New Jersey.
It is in New Jersey. Exactly. Maywood.
New Jersey. Yeah. They're no,
they're the ones who process it and they make medical grade cocaine out of it
and then use the flavor aspect of it for Coca-Cola.
Exactly. And you know, technic at first, as you,
as you put it, most of the cocaine was going for pharmaceutical uses and for,
you know, B lidocaine, all sorts of things like that.
They used for legitimate purposes, but Coke needed actually so much flavoring.
Think about their brand. So big, like wheat.
Grass juice, we squeeze a lot. <laugh>.
Exactly a cup. So they had to like, come up with this special. I love it.
You can't make this stuff up. This is why history is fun.
There's a special exemption in our laws for what are called special leaves
from Peru. And if anybody looking at it saying, well,
what the hell are these special leaves? You know?
And they're special because they're allowed to come into the United States
exclusively basically to create the flavoring extract for Coca-Cola.
And a lot of people call it the Coca-Cola joker.
How closely do you think they monitor that supply? <laugh> you know,
I mean very closely.
They would have to cause like if a bundle or two fell off a truck here or there,
that could be extremely profitable. Right.
I talked to somebody once they said so is there like,
like a pile of cocaine somewhere up in New Jersey, you know,
where this is happening and uh, you know, I don't think that's the case,
but here's, here's the crazy part too. This is,
what's fun about tracing these stories of ingredients because they lead you to
places. You never thought you'd go like this book, which we'll talk about. But,
um, it got weird if that's not weird, it got weirder in the sixties. Um,
because Coca-Cola wanted to figure out a way to make
Coca leaves in the United States to grow their own Coca leaves.
They weren't satisfied with this trade with Peru.
And these are declassified da documents at the national archives.
This is not like, you know, two flow hat. Yeah. Uh, something crazy.
You can see it. And actually it's in the book,
but basically they petitioned the federal government to start
growing it. At first, they're thinking like the Virgin islands,
but then they're like, ah, I don't know. There's like all these tourists,
it's gonna be crazy,
but they have to find a climate in a location geography where they can do this.
And they ultimately go, okay, what about Hawaii?
And they do Joe, they grew Coca leaves,
secretly a totally secret operation called the AKA project
also called AKA. What does that mean? Exactly. Nobody's gonna ask questions,
you know, obfuscate the, the story in Kauai. Oh wow.
And it was done through the university of Hawaii. Uh,
they had to sign all these nondisclosure agreements and they wouldn't publish
their papers. Uh, you know that on the study of all this,
the reason the government agreed to it is that Coke said we're gonna create
cocaine less Coca shrub,
like basically breed a plant that doesn't have cocaine in it.
And of course that never really transpires,
but they do end up growing secretly behind Barb wire fences, COEs for Coca-Cola,
uh, in the sixties. But I'm an environmental histor. I study the,
the relationship between like businesses and the environment. And in this case,
the environment matters cuz nature bit back. So in the sixties,
this fungus that's native to Hawaii was like, whoa, this plant,
uh, that's not native and attacks it. And it wipes out the entire, uh,
Coca crop of Coca-Cola so that the supply they had for a very brief time in the
sixties is wiped out. They go back to sourcing it from, uh, Peru,
watch the entire.
Episode for free only on Spotify.